
                 Home Work Set 1

                 Spatial Databases            Spring 2015

          HINT: gadm.org has shapefiles and other formats of government
     administration units for many countries, and can help you describe
     many locations more precisely.   Their website does not have a shapefile
     viewer, but they suggest ways to view their data.
	 
	 
	 
	 
	 

    1. In this problem, distance means shortest distance along a
      'parallel', i.e. along a latitudinal circle.  This is NOT
      crow flies distance......

       (a) What is the distance from 72W longitude to 55E longitude at a
         (i) latitude of 0 degrees (ii) lat. of 50 degrees
         (iii) the tropic of cancer

       (b) Calculate the longitude for the vertical bisector of zone 33
	   
	   
	   
	   
	   
	   
	   
	   
	   

    2. For each pair of points below, given in terms of geographic coodinates,
      find the great circle distance between the two points.

      (a) p1: lat. 40deg N     long. 70deg W
          p2: lat. 40deg N     long. 60deg E

      (b) p1: lat. 20deg N     long. 145deg W
          p2: lat. 65deg N     long.  35deg E
		  
		  
		  
		  
		  
		  
		  
		  
		  

    3. (a) For hw 2. (a), find the distance if one follows a constant
           bearing of "due West" from p1 to p2.

       (b) Now repeat but for "due East".
	   
	   
	   
	   
	   
	   
	   
	   

    4. (a) Give the Quadrant bearing angle corresponding to the azimuth
           angle of 310 degrees

       (b) Find the azimuth angle that corresponds to S 36deg W

	   
	   
	   
	   
	   
	   
    5. Search the web for information about one conical projection,
      and one azimuthal projection.
      State what you find in between 50 and 150 words.   The words MUST BE
      YOUR OWN.  You may not copy other people's words.  Cite your main
      reference, and no other reference, but you may take information
      from several references.
      You may include one or two images, and those can be freely copied, but
      cited.  Using someone else's work without proper citation is called
      plagiarism.  It can get a professor fired, or a student expelled or your
      company sued.  Learn to never do this.  CS students HAVE been expelled
      for flagrant copying.  If you copy at any point in this course, severe
      grade reduction WILL occur.

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
    6. This is about geog coords.

       (a) find reasonably accurate longitude, latitude for Chihuhua,
          Mexico
       (b) if you go due East for 180 degrees from 6.(a), where in the world
        are you???  is it blue??  give your answer in place names and
        in (long., lat.)  We can define such a journey as finding a
        'parallel' antipode, which is often what people mean by an antipode;
        this is not of course the correct definition of an antipode.
        Specify what country you are in if you are not in an ocean or big
        sea.  If it is a large country, determine the subunit you are
        in inside that country, which may be a state, province, administrative
        unit, island, whatever.
       (c) find (long.,lat.) for the Cape of Good Hope, near the
          Southern tip of Arica
       (d) determine the location of the point antipodal to that in (c);
          this means the long and lat, as well as the part of the world
          where you find yourself.

		  
		  
		  
		  
		  
		  
		  
		  
		  
		  
    7. Convert 33.77 degrees to degrees minutes and seconds, showing some work.
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	