
                             Coordinates and Datums

     Both topics have to do with locating things on maps, or globes.
     Globe locations are given in degrees, i.e. in terms of angles, since
     the alternative is stretching a cloth tape on the globe surface.
     Map coordinates can be given in degrees, or in xy measurements like
     miles or meters.

     A datum is an elaborate and difficult to acquire specification of 
     coordinates for a region.   Most countries have their own datum
     as a national treasure, periodically revised.  Involved in a datum
     are both a chosen ellipsoid or geoid, and a chosen projection.  The
     goals are consistency and accuracy.

     At a technical level, a geoid is the earth's shape if it were all
     ocean, but with the existing densities and gravitational forces.
     People thus discuss a virtual ocean as extending under the current
     land masses.   A region lies within multiple datums.   Canada
     can have its own, but so can North America.   To accurately
     calculate the distance between two points, it is best to find a datum
     for a region encompassing both points, and probably the smallest such
     datum.

     Geographic coordinates refers to giving map location using the familiar 
     latitude and longitude.   Lines of longitude are called 'meridians',
     and the zero or prime meridian runs through Greenwich, England.  Using
     the usual notion of 360 degrees to go around a sphere, from the prime
     meridian one can go West 180 degrees, and East 180 degrees.  So 112
     degrees West is denoted by 112W or by -112.  Zero degrees latitude is 
     the equator, and one proceeds North to the North pole by 1,2,3....,90.
     Latitudes to the South have negative values: -1, -2, ..., -90
     The 'grid' given by drawing lines of latitude and longitude on a map is 
     called a 'graticule'.   Grid lines can be in local coordinates, and
     meet at right angles.   THE graticule can appear as arcs, in many 
     projections.  So grid is a more general term than graticule.

     By good old long division, it can be seem that the length of one
     degree of latitude is 111km, ON AVERAGE.  Because of elliptical 
     flattening, the distance is a little less at the equator, a little
     more near the poles.   If you did the math right this is distance
     measured along the earth's surface.  People who claim they took
     the real geodesic between two points probably were good at tunneling.
     Since that can be difficult, shortest paths are considered to be those
     taken along the earth surface following a great circle.  It should 
     be clear that the distance of a degree of longitude is 111km at 
     the equator, and converges to zero as you approach a pole.

     The shortest path distance between two points can be computed by the 
     formula (3D law of cosines)
          cos(D) = sin a * sin b   +   cos a * cos b * cos(P)
		  // D = inverse cos(sin a * sin b   +   cos a * cos b * cos(P)) * 111.111111
     where D is the angular distance between points A and B, a is the 
     latitude of A, b is the latitude of B, P is the longitudinal angle
     difference between A and B.  These angles will be calculator/computer
     calculated as radians or degrees.  So you calculate cos(D), find D
     using arcos (aka cosine inverse), and then find the real d as D*111km
     if D is in degrees.  For radians, divide by 2*pi, then multiply.
     NOTE: always indicate that you want to go the 'short way' between two 
     points.   So given longitudes of 100W and 50E, let P be 150 and not
     210.  Think of the formula as 'correct' for P of 180 degrees or less.

     Serious navigators, like airplane and ship captains, need these 
     distances, but this is not a hard program feature to write.      
     Another example of a need for a universal system is GPS recorders.

     Map scale is determined in the large by the scale ratio between 
     earth and the mathematical globe used for the projection.  This is a 
     'nominal' scale, and because maps are nowhere perfectly equidistant,
     the real scale varies from place to place on a map.   

     Most maps use a rectangular grid coordinate system where grid lines
     meet at right angles.   Much care is taken to minimize the resultant
     distortion.  

     One popular system is UTM (Universal Tranverse Mercator).  This is 
     really a transverse mercator, so it produces a rectangular grid via
     the projections, and it works well for most countries, and sees use in
     the US and Canada.   With UTM a new 'central meridian' is used every 
     6 degrees, starting from longitude 180, in order to minimize 
     distortion, so each projection covers 6 degrees, west to east.  To
     further reduce distortion, a secant cylinder is used instead of a 
     tangent one.   With most UTM versions, the sixty zones are numbered from
     one to 60, starting with 180W to 174W as zone one, and working east.

     To simplify reference, 6 degree by 8 degree quadrangles
     are used, and subdivided into little squares, accessed by letter 
     indices.   The 6x8 large quads are indexed from 1 to 60, going from 
     180W to 180E, and the latitude belts (or designators)  are indexed using
     [C-X] - {O,I},
     since O,I look like numbers (as in student passwords, hohoho).  Doing
     the math, we have 20*8 = 160 degrees, which is OK since not much 
     happens at poles, and planar projections are used up there.  The effort
     is to make all positions have positive coords.   Within the little
     squares into which the 6x8 quad is divided we use 'eastings' and 
     'northings' from the lower left hand corner of the square.
     NOTE: several sources state that UTM is used from -80degrees to +84degrees,
     and it is not clear where the xtra 4 degrees north come from.  In fact 
     zone X is simply elongated to 12 degrees.
     NOTE: San Francisco is in quadrangle 10S, San Diego is in 11S; the US
      (contiguous) is spanned by zones 10 through 19, and belts R,S,T,U.
     NOTE: some UTM systems do not use the alphabetic belts, but measure 
      everything from the equator.	

     To be more specific, 8 degrees latitude is 888km, so if we want 100
     km tall little squares, we want roughly nine divisions north to 
     south.   The indexing starts at the equator, and uses A-V, cycling as 
     often as needed, so there will be a run of about 9 letters in the 
     breakup of a cell into 100km by 100km  squares.  This actually applies
     to odd indexed zones:1,3,5,etc.   Even indexed zones are offset by 5 and
     run thru the 20 letters starting with F.   From West to East the letters
     A to Z, less I and O, are used, starting at 180W, and recycling every
     18 degrees.    Coordinates will then
     be specified something like   11S  DJ  44 82 (or 11SDJ4482) which means
     zone 11, north-to-south belt S, the 100kmx100km square DJ within that
     cell.   If there are four digits, then in this example 44 is an easting
     of 44km, and a northing of 82 km.  This narrows it to the nearest 
     kilometer.   If we say 445829 then within that square kilometer we go
     east .5 kilometers, and north .9 kilometers.  This is the metric system
     at work. NOTE: some UTM systems do not use this aphabetic breakdown.

     NOTE: the coordinate scheme described about is known as the 'military
      grid' version of the UTM coordinate system.
     NOTE: 'zone' is consistently used to describe the UTM band of 6 degrees
      longitude.
     NOTE: the UTM coord system has a horizontal emphasis because it starts
      with those 60 zones.  Good locations and measurements result by using
      a UTM cylinder tangent to the meridian in the center of each zone, i.e.
      we use 60 UTM projections, along with the 60 zones.
     --------

     Surveyors and others in the US use the SPCS (State Plane Coord. System).
     This is based on the NAD-83 datum  (North America Datum--1983).
     Another datum is SAD-69, and yes, you did guess what it stands for.
     Two other commonly used datums are NAD-27 and WGS-84.

     Often small scale maps use geographical coordinates given in terms
     of degrees of longitude and latitude.  In this case the scheme can be
     in one of two forms:

       1. dd.mm.ss.xx or maybe dd.mmss.xx which represents degrees, minutes
          and seconds. There are 60 minutes in a degree and there are 60
          seconds in a minute, and the xx is a decimal fraction of a second
          if you want to be more particular.

       2. decimal degrees:  here the measurements are given in the form
          dd.xxxx or usually dd.xxx  
            So 1.001,0.000 would be a point on the equator which is 1 degree
          east of the prime meridian, plus 1 thousandth of a degree.
          Since a degree is 111km at the equator, more or less, .001
          is about 111 meters, or 111 healthy strides.  By going to 
          dd.xxxx we can distinguish objects 11 strides apart.
      NOTE: since both 1. and 2. are in heavy use, little Java functions
        to convert between the two are nice to have.   Call the methods
        dmsToDd and dDToDms.   Prototype and write them! 

      In closing we give one more formula, this one for specifying the 
      distance between two consecutive lines of longitude (two meridians)
      at a latitude of n degrees.   The answer is 111.11 cos n

