
                         Types of Maps

    1. General purpose maps:  these maps serve many purposes and contain
     multiple features such as roads, boundaries, capitals, rivers, lakes,
     etc.  Such maps have many 'themes'

    2. Thematic maps:  e.g. map showing which political party has won which
     states in a national election.  Map showing major breweries.

    3. Charts: these maps are used for navigation by boats or airplanes,
      typically

    4. Topographic maps: used to show terrain, altitude, so forth
       Contours are a tool.   

       Swedish army dictum: when the map and the terrain disagree, always 
       believe the terrain.

       important tool: contour lines---lines of constant altitude, typically
          concentric 'circles'

    5. Road maps

    6. Cadastral maps: maps showing property boundaries, property ID's, etc.
		- Meats and bounds

    7. Mental maps: typically badly scaled semi-visual notions in our minds
     about where things are and how to get there.    This is an  example of a 
     rapidly fading human ability.   The Apaches did this well.  

    8. Virtual maps----essentially maps in a DB for display by a computer;
      can be interactive.   And should be; if so they are dynamic maps.

    9. Raster or image maps.  Maps created by aerial or satellite photos
       and stored more or less as digitized bits, faithful to the picture.
       Since they are just pictures, they are often enhanced with boundaries
       and other 'man made' demarcations.  "Natural" colors can be modified 
       for emphasis, e.g. to display types of vegetation.

  -------------------------------------------

   Map features:

      scale: an inch on the map means we have to drive how far?

      directions: which way is up?  north?

      legend: how do I read this stupid map?
  
      symbology, e.g.   /\   means  campground or mountain or whatever
         (can be explicated by the legend)

      coloration: most maps make good use of colors, e.g. to make boundaries
        easier to spot;  show republican won states in red;  show interstate
         highways in red.

      others:  maps often include charts (e.g. bar charts or pie charts)
          and tables.

