Map Projections

Decent web references:
 1. http://www.colorado.edu/geography/gcraft/notes/mapproj/mapproj.html
 2. http://egsc.usgs.gov/isb/pubs/MapProjections/projections.html
 3. http://www.lib.umd.edu/GOV/GIO/maps.html

The basic problem is how to map a 3D world onto a 2D computer screen or
sheet of paper.   An attempt to do so will lose something.   There is
no self-evident way to present this material.

A map projection is capable of preserving some but not all of the following:
(a) distances (this means that the ratio of map distance to real world
   distance is constant or very nearly so throughout the map), i.e. that
   the 'scale' is not a laughable approximation
(b) direction (also known as 'angle'): this means 'north' on the map always
   means real world north.  Moreover this applies to other directions
   like 'north east', which is a 45 degree angle in the clockwise direction
   from the y axis, and the origin of the map.
(c) area: which means the ratio of map area to real world areas is a constant
    (a term like 'equal area' might be used) A.k.a "equivalent" projection.
(d) shape: an equilateral triangle in the real world will be an equilateral
   triangle on the map;  there is no promise here of constant area ratio
   however, i.e. the triangles can be similar, and not area preserving, i.e.
   (d) does not imply (c) or conversely.

NOTE: a map is 'conformal', if it preserves angles and shapes, at least
   in local areas.

A globe preserves a,b,c,d above and is conformal.   No flat map serves as
well.

The globe:
  meridians are halves of great circles through both poles.  They are
  specified relative to the Prime Meridian that goes through Greenwich,
  England.  This meridian has 'degree zero", and the whole set is
  specified as ranging from -180 degrees to +180 degrees, or as 180deg W
  to 180deg E.   The meridians are evenly spaced in terms of angles
  measured from the center of the earth, but the distance between them is
  a function of distance from the equator.

  meridians are measurements of 'longitude'

  parallels are measurements of latitude.  The equator is at 'degree 0'.
  The parallels range from -90 degrees to +90 degrees, ranging from south
  pole to north pole.  They are equally spaced in terms of angles, and are
  also equally spaced therefore in terms of real world surface distance on
  the map.   Because the circumference of the map is 25000 miles, and the
  pole to pole distance is half that, the typical map of the entire world
  is usually twice as wide as it is tall.

  the globe is roughly spherical, but slightly squashed at the poles, i.e.
  an ellipsoid, but there is considerable variation in altitude since no
  one sanded it down to a perfect orb.  The term geoid is sometimes used to
  describe the ultimate global reality, or in its very technical meaning,
  what the globe would look like at ocean height, if the ocean were
  extended under land masses in a manner consistent with gravitational forces
  at each point.  Gravitational forces vary from point to point.

--

The basic (standard) Mercator projection is the best known map of the
entire globe.  The projection is 'cylindrical', i.e. is based on a
particular cylinder, in this case one that wraps neatly around the equator.
(technically, the cylinder notion is an approximation, and really an
'inflated sphere' is how it is done, but that is not a big deal)

If one projects from the north south axis in a horizontal direction, the
areas and latitudes near the poles would be horribly compressed, and
distances in northern realms therefore horribly distorted north to south.
The northern parallels are artificially close together.  This effect is
the same as if you take a picture of the earth from the moon, more or less.
The basic Mercator uses the scheme below, or something close thereto.

If one projects from the center of the earth, then the map MUST BE infinite
in the vertical direction in order to capture every point except the two
poles.  This was seen as using too much paper or too many pixels.   So
one cheats by OMITTING parts of the two polar regions.   Nonetheless the
cylinder projected upon is TALLER than the poles.  There is thus a lot of
distortion in the polar regions, as well as some omission.  The distortion
is that east to west distances are enormously stretched as we move north.
Moreover the distance between parallels also increases as we move north.

Distance is true (preserved) on the equator only, and only close to true
near the equator.   The map is conformal in the small, i.e. if a small
area is exploded.   The map preserves direction however.   A 'rhumb'
line, i.e. a straight line on the map is a true direction, but does not
correspond to a great circle arc, i.e. distance is not perfect or
shortest.

NOTE: some Mercator maps are viewed is being drawn for a cylinder whose
diameter is smaller than the Earth's, e.g. passing through the parallels
at +45, -45.   This causes less distortion for the good old US of A.

In this case distance is true at three parallels: -45, 0, 45
This kind of map is called a SECANT mercator map, since the cylinder
intersects the Earth in what is called a secant in your friendly
neighborhood calculus class.

NOTE: the kind of map originally described is a TANGENT Mercator map
with the cylinder tangent to the equator.

A transverse Mercator is one where the cylinder is tangent to a great circle
through the poles.
An oblique Mercator is one where the cylinder is tangent to any other great
circle.

a website to check for Mercator is
   www.math.ubc.ca/~israel/m103/mercator/mercator.html

NOTE: sometimes conformal maps are characterized by saying meridians meet
  parallels at right angles.   This is often more or less a true
  statement and is true in spades about the basic Mercator projection.

NOTE: it is sometimes asserted that for large maps, conformal and equal-area
  cannot be achieved simultaneously.   I would not know how to prove that.
  The basic Mercator is badly NOT equal area.  A conic equal area map
  with the cone point at the north pole, will have meridians meeting
  parallels at right angles (at least in terms of tangent lines to arcs
  repesenting parallels), but will not preserve direction or shape---the
  distance between parallels will now tend to decrease with distance from
  the pole, the opposite effect from the basic Mercator.  This map does
  not tend to preserve shape well at large distances from the pole, i.e.
  where it counts:  populous areas.

---
Def. azimuth is an angle from some axis
        or
     ....(various astronomical meanings)
Def. azimuthal projection: a projection onto a plane where the plane is
  tangent to the earth at some point.   aka planar projection; the term
  'planner' applied to a surface means 'flat' also.

 aspects/flavors: 1. polar:  plane touches a pole
                  2. equitorial: plane touches the equator
                  3. oblique: other

 the point of projection can be at infinity, or on the globe opposite the
 point of tangency or .....

 the 'aspect' of a side of a hill is the direction that slope 'faces';
 if the are running down a hill (be careful) and facing East, then East
 is the aspect of your trail
---

 A conic projection is a projection onto a cone which is then sliced and
 unfolded. the cone can be tangent to a parallel, or oblique or secant or
 whatever.  the usual flavors are possible.   The point of projection can be
 on the globe, e.g. a pole, or 'above' the globe, or whatever.

---
 To understand preservation issues, imagine the area betwee two consecutive
  meridians, and two consecutive parallels at about +45.   the top and bottom
  edges will be concave, and the sides will clearly not be parallel, but
  'converge' to the north pole.   An equal area map will look much like
  this sketch.  Clearly area and distance are fairly well preserved, but
  direction is not.   Two non parallel lines cannot both point north.
  If this area is distorted to a rectangle, clearly area and distance will
  suffer, but direction will now be preserved.   And the map will be
  regarded as conformal, i.e. LOCALLY preserving shape and direction.





 If a projection is onto a plane, the word 'perspective' describes the
 location of the point which is the center of the projection.

 More terms:
  (a) if the center of the projection is the center of the earth, the
   projection is 'gnomonic' (gno is a root word for 'know')
    Such a projection shows great circles as straight lines.
  (b) if the center of the projection is the point on the earth surface
   opposite the point of a tangent plane, the projection is stereographic
  (c) if the projection is made from a point at infinity, the projection
   is orthographic
  (d) rhumb line or loxodrome: a line of constant direction -- it intersects
    every meridian at the same angle;  e.g. if you follow a NE rhumb line
    from San Diego for a long ways, what point are you guaranteed to reach?
    Or coverge to?  The following are the same: line of constant bearing,
    rhumb line, loxodrome, and the colloquial phrase coming from them:
    dead reckoning.  Whereas "as the crow flies" means a great circle arc.

 Summary: azimuthal: projected on a plane, either tangent or secant.
   gives a wonderful head start on preserving directions, so sometimes
   'azimuthal' means direction preserving.  For a planar map, one can
   discuss 'perspective', which refers to the projection point.

         cylindrical: projected on a tangent or secant cylinder.  Such maps
   are characterized to looking like rectangles when unfolded.  Of course
   one could be viciously deceptive and cut a circle out of one.

         conic: projected onto a cone;   when unfolded these maps tend to
   look like a fan.   For strategic reasons, the cone point is usually
   a pole.

 Microsoft interview question:  from how many places on the globe can you
    walk one mile south, one mile east, and finally one mile north, and be
    back where you started?

 Geographers describe direction primarily by one of the following methods:
   1. Azimuth
   2. Quadrant
 An 'azimuth' of zero degrees by definition indicates due North.  For all
 other directions, swing and measure an angle by going clockwise from the
 y axis.  Thus an azimuth of 90 degrees specifies due East, 180 is due
 South, so forth.

 There are four quadrants: NE, NW, SE, SW.  To indicate a direction pick
 the right quadrant and then fine tune. E.g. N 60 deg E is the same as an
 azimuth of 60 degrees.  E.g. S 30 deg W is the same as an azimuth of 210.

 Some oft used projections are these
  1. Mercator cylindrical
  2. Lambert Azimuthal Equal-Area
  3. Albers Conic Equal-Area
  4. Robinson compromise projection (tries to distort everything a bit, but
        nothing too much)
  5. Mollweide elliptical (squishes the globe at the poles with some drama)
  6. Sinusoidal equal-area (aka Mercator Equal-Area)
      parallels are equally spaced, and inter-meridian distance is
       accurately proportional to latitude (uses the cos() multiplier)
  7. Peter's equal area, aka Gall equal area
      originally done by Jas. Gall, then reinvented by Arno Peters;  got
      a lot of politically correct press for not making Greenland look as big
      as Africa----not loved by cartographers, but worth a Google;
     Monmonier, who authored "How to Lie With Maps", says it looks like wet
     ragged underwear, hung on the Arctic Circle (rough quote)